{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Consolas;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.18362}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs22\tab\tab        GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\par
\tab\tab\tab    Version 2.1, February 1999\par
\par
Copyright (C) 1991, 1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.  59 Temple Place, Suite\par
330, Boston, MA\~02111-1307 USA\par
\par
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license\par
document, but changing it is not allowed.\par
\par
[This is the first released version of the Lesser GPL.  It also counts as the\par
successor of the GNU Library Public License, version\~2, hence the version\par
number\~2.1.]\par
\par
\tab\tab\tab\tab     Preamble\par
\par
The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share\par
and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public Licenses are intended to\par
guarantee your freedom to share and change free software--to make sure the\par
software is free for all its users.\par
\par
This license, the Lesser General Public License, applies to some specially\par
designated software packages--typically libraries--of the Free Software\par
Foundation and other authors who decide to use it.  You can use it too, but we\par
suggest you first think carefully about whether this license or the ordinary\par
General Public License is the better strategy to use in any particular case,\par
based on the explanations below.\par
\par
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom of use, not price.\par
Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom\par
to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this service if you wish);\par
that you receive source code or can get it if you want it; that you can change\par
the software and use pieces of it in new free programs; and that you are\par
informed that you can do these things.\par
\par
To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid distributors to\par
deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender these rights.  These\par
restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you distribute\par
copies of the library or if you modify it.\par
\par
For example, if you distribute copies of the library, whether gratis or for a\par
fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that we gave you.  You must\par
make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.  If you link other\par
code with the library, you must provide complete object files to the recipients,\par
so that they can relink them with the library after making changes to the\par
library and recompiling it.  And you must show them these terms so they know\par
their rights.\par
\par
We protect your rights with a two-step method: (1)\~we copyright the library, and\par
(2)\~we offer you this license, which gives you legal permission to copy,\par
distribute and/or modify the library.\par
\par
To protect each distributor, we want to make it very clear that there is no\par
warranty for the free library.  Also, if the library is modified by someone else\par
and passed on, the recipients should know that what they have is not the\par
original version, so that the original author\rquote s reputation will not be affected\par
by problems that might be introduced by others.\par
\par
Finally, software patents pose a constant threat to the existence of any free\par
program.  We wish to make sure that a company cannot effectively restrict the\par
users of a free program by obtaining a restrictive license from a patent holder.\par
Therefore, we insist that any patent license obtained for a version of the\par
library must be consistent with the full freedom of use specified in this\par
license.\par
\par
Most GNU software, including some libraries, is covered by the ordinary GNU\par
General Public License.  This license, the GNU Lesser General Public License,\par
applies to certain designated libraries, and is quite different from the\par
ordinary General Public License.  We use this license for certain libraries in\par
order to permit linking those libraries into non-free programs.\par
\par
When a program is linked with a library, whether statically or using a shared\par
library, the combination of the two is legally speaking a combined work, a\par
derivative of the original library.  The ordinary General Public License\par
therefore permits such linking only if the entire combination fits its criteria\par
of freedom.  The Lesser General Public License permits more lax criteria for\par
linking other code with the library.\par
\par
We call this license the \ldblquote Lesser\rdblquote  General Public License because it does Less to\par
protect the user\rquote s freedom than the ordinary General Public License.  It also\par
provides other free software developers Less of an advantage over competing\par
non-free programs.  These disadvantages are the reason we use the ordinary\par
General Public License for many libraries.  However, the Lesser license provides\par
advantages in certain special circumstances.\par
\par
For example, on rare occasions, there may be a special need to encourage the\par
widest possible use of a certain library, so that it becomes a de-facto\par
standard.  To achieve this, non-free programs must be allowed to use the\par
library.  A more frequent case is that a free library does the same job as\par
widely used non-free libraries.  In this case, there is little to gain by\par
limiting the free library to free software only, so we use the Lesser General\par
Public License.\par
\par
In other cases, permission to use a particular library in non-free programs\par
enables a greater number of people to use a large body of free software.  For\par
example, permission to use the GNU C\~Library in non-free programs enables many\par
more people to use the whole GNU operating system, as well as its variant, the\par
GNU/Linux operating system.\par
\par
Although the Lesser General Public License is Less protective of the users\rquote\par
freedom, it does ensure that the user of a program that is linked with the\par
Library has the freedom and the wherewithal to run that program using a modified\par
version of the Library.\par
\par
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification\par
follow.  Pay close attention to the difference between a \ldblquote work based on the\par
library\rdblquote  and a \ldblquote work that uses the library\rdblquote .  The former contains code derived\par
from the library, whereas the latter must be combined with the library in order\par
to run.\par
\par
\tab\tab        GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\par
\tab TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION\par
\par
    0. This License Agreement applies to any software library or other program\par
       which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder or other\par
       authorized party saying it may be distributed under the terms of this\par
       Lesser General Public License (also called \ldblquote this License\rdblquote ).  Each\par
       licensee is addressed as \ldblquote you\rdblquote .\par
\par
       A \ldblquote library\rdblquote  means a collection of software functions and/or data prepared\par
       so as to be conveniently linked with application programs (which use some\par
       of those functions and data) to form executables.\par
\par
       The \ldblquote Library\rdblquote , below, refers to any such software library or work which\par
       has been distributed under these terms.  A \ldblquote work based on the Library\rdblquote\par
       means either the Library or any derivative work under copyright law: that\par
       is to say, a work containing the Library or a portion of it, either\par
       verbatim or with modifications and/or translated straightforwardly into\par
       another language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without\par
       limitation in the term \ldblquote modification\rdblquote .)\par
\par
       \ldblquote Source code\rdblquote  for a work means the preferred form of the work for making\par
       modifications to it.  For a library, complete source code means all the\par
       source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated interface\par
       definition files, plus the scripts used to control compilation and\par
       installation of the library.\par
\par
       Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not\par
       covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of running\par
       a program using the Library is not restricted, and output from such a\par
       program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the\par
       Library (independent of the use of the Library in a tool for writing it).\par
       Whether that is true depends on what the Library does and what the\par
       program that uses the Library does.\par
\par
    1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Library\rquote s complete\par
       source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you\par
       conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate\par
       copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices\par
       that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty; and\par
       distribute a copy of this License along with the Library.\par
\par
       You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you\par
       may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.\par
\par
     2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Library or any portion of it,\par
       thus forming a work based on the Library, and copy and distribute such\par
       modifications or work under the terms of Section\~1 above, provided that\par
       you also meet all of these conditions:\par
\par
       a) The modified work must itself be a software library.\par
\par
       b) You must cause the files modified to carry prominent notices stating\par
          that you changed the files and the date of any change.\par
\par
       c) You must cause the whole of the work to be licensed at no charge to\par
          all third parties under the terms of this License.\par
\par
       d) If a facility in the modified Library refers to a function or a table\par
          of data to be supplied by an application program that uses the\par
          facility, other than as an argument passed when the facility is\par
          invoked, then you must make a good faith effort to ensure that, in the\par
          event an application does not supply such function or table, the\par
          facility still operates, and performs whatever part of its purpose\par
          remains meaningful.\par
\par
\tab   (For example, a function in a library to compute square roots has a\par
          purpose that is entirely well-defined independent of the application.\par
          Therefore, Subsection\~2d requires that any application-supplied\par
          function or table used by this function must be optional: if the\par
          application does not supply it, the square root function must still\par
          compute square roots.)\par
\par
       These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If\par
       identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Library, and\par
       can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in\par
       themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those\par
       sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you\par
       distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on\par
       the Library, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this\par
       License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire\par
       whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.\par
\par
       Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest\par
       your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to\par
       exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or\par
       collective works based on the Library.\par
\par
       In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Library\par
       with the Library (or with a work based on the Library) on a volume of a\par
       storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the\par
       scope of this License.\par
\par
    3. You may opt to apply the terms of the ordinary GNU General Public License\par
       instead of this License to a given copy of the Library.  To do this, you\par
       must alter all the notices that refer to this License, so that they refer\par
       to the ordinary GNU General Public License, version\~2, instead of to this\par
       License.  (If a newer version than version\~2 of the ordinary GNU General\par
       Public License has appeared, then you can specify that version instead if\par
       you wish.)  Do not make any other change in these notices.\par
\par
       Once this change is made in a given copy, it is irreversible for that\par
       copy, so the ordinary GNU General Public License applies to all\par
       subsequent copies and derivative works made from that copy.\par
\par
       This option is useful when you wish to copy part of the code of the\par
       Library into a program that is not a library.\par
\par
    4. You may copy and distribute the Library (or a portion or derivative of\par
       it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of\par
       Sections\~1 and\~2 above provided that you accompany it with the complete\par
       corresponding machine-readable source code, which must be distributed\par
       under the terms of Sections\~1 and\~2 above on a medium customarily used\par
       for software interchange.\par
\par
       If distribution of object code is made by offering access to copy from a\par
       designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code\par
       from the same place satisfies the requirement to distribute the source\par
       code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source\par
       along with the object code.\par
\par
    5. A program that contains no derivative of any portion of the Library, but\par
       is designed to work with the Library by being compiled or linked with it,\par
       is called a \ldblquote work that uses the Library\rdblquote .  Such a work, in isolation, is\par
       not a derivative work of the Library, and therefore falls outside the\par
       scope of this License.\par
\par
       However, linking a \ldblquote work that uses the Library\rdblquote  with the Library creates\par
       an executable that is a derivative of the Library (because it contains\par
       portions of the Library), rather than a \ldblquote work that uses the library\rdblquote .\par
       The executable is therefore covered by this License.  Section\~6 states\par
       terms for distribution of such executables.\par
\par
       When a \ldblquote work that uses the Library\rdblquote  uses material from a header file that\par
       is part of the Library, the object code for the work may be a derivative\par
       work of the Library even though the source code is not.  Whether this is\par
       true is especially significant if the work can be linked without the\par
       Library, or if the work is itself a library.  The threshold for this to\par
       be true is not precisely defined by law.\par
\par
       If such an object file uses only numerical parameters, data structure\par
       layouts and accessors, and small macros and small inline functions (ten\par
       lines or less in length), then the use of the object file is\par
       unrestricted, regardless of whether it is legally a derivative work.\par
       (Executables containing this object code plus portions of the Library\par
       will still fall under Section\~6.)\par
\par
       Otherwise, if the work is a derivative of the Library, you may distribute\par
       the object code for the work under the terms of Section\~6.  Any\par
       executables containing that work also fall under Section\~6, whether or\par
       not they are linked directly with the Library itself.\par
\par
    6. As an exception to the Sections above, you may also combine or link a\par
       \ldblquote work that uses the Library\rdblquote  with the Library to produce a work\par
       containing portions of the Library, and distribute that work under terms\par
       of your choice, provided that the terms permit modification of the work\par
       for the customer\rquote s own use and reverse engineering for debugging such\par
       modifications.\par
\par
       You must give prominent notice with each copy of the work that the\par
       Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are covered by\par
       this License.  You must supply a copy of this License.  If the work\par
       during execution displays copyright notices, you must include the\par
       copyright notice for the Library among them, as well as a reference\par
       directing the user to the copy of this License.  Also, you must do one of\par
       these things:\par
\par
       a) Accompany the work with the complete corresponding machine-readable\par
       \tab   source code for the Library including whatever changes were used in\par
       \tab   the work (which must be distributed under Sections\~1 and\~2 above);\par
       \tab   and, if the work is an executable linked with the Library, with the\par
       \tab   complete machine-readable \ldblquote work that uses the Library\rdblquote , as object code\par
       \tab   and/or source code, so that the user can modify the Library and then\par
       \tab   relink to produce a modified executable containing the modified\par
       \tab   Library.  (It is understood that the user who changes the contents of\par
       \tab   definitions files in the Library will not necessarily be able to\par
       \tab   recompile the application to use the modified definitions.)\par
\par
       b) Use a suitable shared library mechanism for linking with the Library.\par
       \tab   A suitable mechanism is one that (1)\~uses at run time a copy of the\par
       \tab   library already present on the user\rquote s computer system, rather than\par
       \tab   copying library functions into the executable, and (2)\~will operate\par
       \tab   properly with a modified version of the library, if the user installs\par
       \tab   one, as long as the modified version is interface-compatible with the\par
       \tab   version that the work was made with.\par
\par
       c) Accompany the work with a written offer, valid for at least three\par
       \tab   years, to give the same user the materials specified in Subsection\~6a,\par
       \tab   above, for a charge no more than the cost of performing this\par
       \tab   distribution.\par
\par
       d) If distribution of the work is made by offering access to copy from a\par
       \tab   designated place, offer equivalent access to copy the above specified\par
       \tab   materials from the same place.\par
\par
       e) Verify that the user has already received a copy of these materials or\par
       \tab   that you have already sent this user a copy.\par
\par
\tab   For an executable, the required form of the \ldblquote work that uses the\par
       \tab   Library\rdblquote  must include any data and utility programs needed for\par
       \tab   reproducing the executable from it.  However, as a special exception,\par
       \tab   the materials to be distributed need not include anything that is\par
       \tab   normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major\par
       \tab   components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on\par
       \tab   which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies\par
       \tab   the executable.\par
\par
\tab   It may happen that this requirement contradicts the license\par
       \tab   restrictions of other proprietary libraries that do not normally\par
       \tab   accompany the operating system.  Such a contradiction means you cannot\par
       \tab   use both them and the Library together in an executable that you\par
       \tab   distribute.\par
\par
    7. You may place library facilities that are a work based on the Library\par
       side-by-side in a single library together with other library facilities\par
       not covered by this License, and distribute such a combined library,\par
       provided that the separate distribution of the work based on the Library\par
       and of the other library facilities is otherwise permitted, and provided\par
       that you do these two things:\par
\par
       a) Accompany the combined library with a copy of the same work based on\par
       \tab   the Library, uncombined with any other library facilities.  This must\par
       \tab   be distributed under the terms of the Sections above.\par
\par
       b) Give prominent notice with the combined library of the fact that part\par
       \tab   of it is a work based on the Library, and explaining where to find the\par
       \tab   accompanying uncombined form of the same work.\par
\par
    8. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the\par
       Library except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt\par
       otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute the\par
       Library is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this\par
       License.  However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you\par
       under this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as\par
       such parties remain in full compliance.\par
\par
    9. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed\par
       it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or distribute\par
       the Library or its derivative works.  These actions are prohibited by law\par
       if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by modifying or\par
       distributing the Library (or any work based on the Library), you indicate\par
       your acceptance of this License to do so, and all its terms and\par
       conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the Library or works\par
       based on it.\par
\par
   10. Each time you redistribute the Library (or any work based on the\par
       Library), the recipient automatically receives a license from the\par
       original licensor to copy, distribute, link with or modify the Library\par
       subject to these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further\par
       restrictions on the recipients\rquote  exercise of the rights granted herein.\par
       You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties with\par
       this License.\par
\par
   11. If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent\par
       infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),\par
       conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or\par
       otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not\par
       excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot distribute\par
       so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and\par
       any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not\par
       distribute the Library at all.  For example, if a patent license would\par
       not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Library by all those who\par
       receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you\par
       could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from\par
       distribution of the Library.\par
\par
       If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any\par
       particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to apply,\par
       and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other circumstances.\par
\par
       It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any\par
       patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any such\par
       claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the integrity of\par
       the free software distribution system which is implemented by public\par
       license practices.  Many people have made generous contributions to the\par
       wide range of software distributed through that system in reliance on\par
       consistent application of that system; it is up to the author/donor to\par
       decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other\par
       system and a licensee cannot impose that choice.\par
\par
       This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be\par
       a consequence of the rest of this License.\par
\par
   12. If the distribution and/or use of the Library is restricted in certain\par
       countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the original\par
       copyright holder who places the Library under this License may add an\par
       explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries,\par
       so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus\par
       excluded.  In such case, this License incorporates the limitation as if\par
       written in the body of this License.\par
\par
   13. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of\par
       the Lesser General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions\par
       will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in\par
       detail to address new problems or concerns.\par
\par
       Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Library\par
       specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and \ldblquote any\par
       later version\rdblquote , you have the option of following the terms and conditions\par
       either of that version or of any later version published by the Free\par
       Software Foundation.  If the Library does not specify a license version\par
       number, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software\par
       Foundation.\par
\par
   14. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Library into other free programs\par
       whose distribution conditions are incompatible with these, write to the\par
       author to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the\par
       Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we\par
       sometimes make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the\par
       two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free\par
       software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.\par
\par
\tab\tab\tab\tab   NO WARRANTY\par
\par
   15. BECAUSE THE LIBRARY IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR\par
       THE LIBRARY, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN\par
       OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES\par
       PROVIDE THE LIBRARY \ldblquote AS IS\rdblquote  WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER\par
       EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED\par
       WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE\par
       ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE LIBRARY IS WITH YOU.\par
       SHOULD THE LIBRARY PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY\par
       SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.\par
\par
   16. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING\par
       WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR\par
       REDISTRIBUTE THE LIBRARY AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR\par
       DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL\par
       DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE LIBRARY (INCLUDING\par
       BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR\par
       LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE LIBRARY TO\par
       OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER SOFTWARE), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS\par
       BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.\par
\par
\tab\tab\tab   END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS\par
\par
\tab\tab  How to Apply These Terms to Your New Libraries\par
\par
If you develop a new library, and you want it to be of the greatest possible use\par
to the public, we recommend making it free software that everyone can\par
redistribute and change.  You can do so by permitting redistribution under these\par
terms (or, alternatively, under the terms of the ordinary General Public\par
License).\par
\par
To apply these terms, attach the following notices to the library.  It is safest\par
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively convey the\par
exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least the \ldblquote copyright\rdblquote  line\par
and a pointer to where the full notice is found.\par
\par
    <one line to give the library\rquote s name and a brief idea of what it does.>\par
    Copyright (C) <year> <name of author>\par
\par
    This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it\par
    under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the\par
    Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of the License, or (at your\par
    option) any later version.\par
\par
    This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT\par
    ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or\par
    FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Lesser General Public License\par
    for more details.\par
\par
    You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License\par
    along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,\par
    Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA\par
\par
Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.\par
\par
You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your school,\par
if any, to sign a \ldblquote copyright disclaimer\rdblquote  for the library, if necessary.  Here is\par
a sample; alter the names:\par
\par
    Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in the library\par
    `Frob\rquote  (a library for tweaking knobs) written by James Random Hacker.\par
\par
    <signature of Ty Coon>, 1 April 1990\par
    Ty Coon, President of Vice\par
\par
That\rquote s all there is to it!\par
\par
}
 